---
title: 8. REGARDING BAPTISMAL CUSTOMS.
description: 
---

Every baptismal act is valid in which water is applied to  a person in the name of the Triune God. However, in the course  of time many customs and ceremonies have attached themselves  to this important Sacrament. These Gerhard (Locus de Baptismo,  §§ 258-269) divides into three classes, namely, a) such as are  based upon the divine command; b) such as were established by  the apostles; and c) such as were added later. 

However, when we speak of baptismal customs and ceremonies,  we ought to exclude all acts commanded by God (the application  of water in the name of the Triune God) and consider only the  usages which were developed in the course of time within the  Church. What God has established by divine command does not  lie on the same level as that which has been added by men.

According to Dr. C. F. W. Walther (Pastorale, p. 130 ff.), the  recognized customs and ceremonies of Baptism are the following:  a) the reference to original sin; b) the giving of the name; c) the  so-called "small exorcism”; d) the sign of the cross; e) a prayer  and the benediction; f) the ‘large exorcism”; g) the reading of  Mark 10,13—16; h) the laying on of hands; i) the Lord’s Prayer;  j) the renunciation and the Apostles’ Creed; k) the use of sponsors; 1) the covering of the child with the baptismal garment;  m) the final blessing. All these usages are in themselves only res  indifferentes (adiaphora), which may be employed or omitted  without injury to the sacramental action; nevertheless, as the  Formula of Concord aptly remarks [Epit., X, 5](https://boc.confident.faith/ep-x-0005){:target="_blank"}, “herein all  frivolity and offense should be avoided, and especial care should  be taken to exercise forbearance towards the weak in faith, 1 Cor.  8, 9; Rom. 14,13.” 

