---
title: 8. THE POWER OF THE PUBLIC MINISTRY.
description: 
---

Since the pastoral office is the ministry of the ditJins Word (ministerium Verbi et sacramentorum1 Gnadenmittelamt1 potestas clavium), all believers are in duty bound to obey their pastors just as they obey God Himself, Heb. 13, 17; Luke 10, 16. As long therefore as pastors are true ministers of the Word, their authority (potestas) is as great as that of the divine Word. However, as soon as they go beyond God's Word and teach commandments of men, they have no authority at all, and their hearers must refuse them obedience for conscience' sake, Matt. 23, 8; Rom. 16, 17.

Adiaphora (res mediae), that is, matters which are neither commanded nor forbidden by God's Word, should not be adjudged by the minister, but by the entire congregation by common consent (per mutuum consensum).

Against the claim of the papists that laymen must obey their priests in all things, the Apology correctly declares [Art. XXVIII, 19. 20](https://boc.confident.faith/ap-xxviii-0018){:target="_blank"}: "He that heareth you heareth Me, Luke 10, 16, cannot be understood of traditions. For Christ requires that they teach in such a way that (by their mouth) He Himself be heard, because He says: 'He heareth Me.' Therefore He wishes His own voice, His own Word, to be heard, not human traditions. Thus a saying which is most especially in our favor and contains the most important consolation and doctrine these stupid men pervert to the most trifling matters, the distinction of food, vestments, and the like. They quote Heb. 13, 17: 'Obey them that have the rule over you.' This passage requires obedience to the Gospel. For it does not establish a dominion for the bishops apart from the Gospel. Neither should the bishops frame traditions contrary to the Gospel or interpret their traditions contrary to the Gospel. And when they do this, obedience is prohibited, according to Gal. 1, 9 : 'If any man preach any other gospel, let him be accursed.'"

The minister therefore has no power or jurisdiction whatever (iure divino) outside his call and office. His authority is limited to the potestas clavium (the Office of the Keys, Schluesselgewalt).