---
title: 4. THE PRIESTLY INTERCESSION OF CHRIST.
description: 
---

[12cb1]: ## "Reference; 1. The vicarious atonement."

The sacerdotal office of Christ embraces two parts: a) [satisfaction][12cb1] and b) **intercession**. 

Already in His state of humiliation Christ interceded for men (_intercessio terrestris_), John 14, 16; 17, 9; Heb. 5, 6—10. From the nature of Christ’s intercessions these are divided into two classes: a) general intercessions (_intercessio generalis_), Luke 23, 34, which were made for men in general; and b) special intercessions (_intercessio specialis_), John 17, 9 ff., which were offered up for believers. 

However, Christ remains a Priest also after His exaltation, Heb. 7, 24. 25, and in this state He administers His priestly office, not by repeating His atoning work, Rom. 6, 9.10; Heb. 9,12—15; 7, 26. 27, but by interceding for the elect of God (_intercessio coelestis_). This perpetual intercession of the exalted Christ has no atoning value (_intercessio Christi in statu exaltationis non est satisfactory_), but merely applicative value (_intercessio Christi in statu exaltationis est applicatoria_), Heb. 7, 24. 25; 1 John 2, 1; Rom. 8, 34; that is to say, it relates to the gathering and preservation of the Church, or to the salvation of the elect (_Christus est Mediator reconciliationis_), Rom. 8, 34; Heb. 7, 25; 1 John 2, 1. 

According to Scripture the heavenly intercession of our glorified Mediator is both real _(intercessio realis_), that is. He presents to the Father perpetually the holy blood which He shed for the sins of the world (Chemnitz: _Ostendit vultui Dei, quae stigmata pro redemptione nostra accepit_, Heb. 9, 12), and verbal (_intercessio verbalis_), that is, He actually prays for men, Heb. 7, 25; Rom. 8,34; 1 John 2,1, though this must be understood in a manner becoming the exalted Lord, who sits at the right hand of God (_intercessio incomprehensibilis_). 

In contradistinction to the intercession of the Holy Spirit (_intercessio Spiritus Sancti_), Rom. 8, 26. 27, the exalted Christ intercedes as the God-man (_intercessio ϑεανόριχή_) and on the basis of His own merits (_merito ipsius intercessoris_), while the intercession of the Holy Spirit (_intercessio ϑεική_, Rom. 8, 27, “according to the will of God,” _κατά ϑεόν_) rests on the ground of Christ’s redemption (_merito alterius_), Gal. 4, 4—6. 

The constant intercession of the exalted Savior at the right hand of God gives the believer the most certain assurance of his final salvation, Rom. 8, 34—39. 

The Unitarians (Modernists) deny Christ’s vicarious satisfaction and therefore reject Christ’s intercession, which is based upon His atonement. According to the Unitarian view, Christ’s only function as priest is to inspire men by precept and example to become their own saviors. The papists supplement Christ’s intercessory work with the intercessions and merit of the saints and thus deny the Scriptural truth that Christ is the only Mediator between God and man, 1 Tim. 2, 5. 6. 
