---
title: 9. THE GREAT VALUE OF GOOD WORKS.
description: 
---

Although good works have no value so far as the juatification of a sinner is concerned, since salvation is not by works, but by grace, Rom. 3, 28; Eph. 2, 8. 9, it is incorrect to declare that good works are of no value whatsoever. To say that good works have no value whatever, as the Anabaptists at Luther's time claimed, is both anti-Scriptural, since Scripture with great earnestness inculcates good works, Eph. 2, 10; Matt. 5, 13-16, and unreasonable, since even conscience, on the basis of the divine Law inscribed in the human heart, prompts a person to do what is good, Rom. 2, 14. 15. Over against the enthusiasts, Luther [St. L., IX, 442 ff.](https://archive.org/details/st-l-09-deep-l-en/page/n235/mode/2up){:target="_blank"} emphasized the truth that outside the article of justification good works indeed could not be praised enough ("Extra causam iustificationis nemo potest bona opera a Deo praecepta satis magnifice commendure").

Against the Anabaptists, Luther wrote [St. L., XIV, 310 ff.](https://archive.org/details/st-l-14-deep-l-en/page/n179/mode/2up){:target="_blank"}: "See how nobly they teach regarding good works, saying that they would give away all their good works for a farthing! By this they want to be our apes and imitate our doctrine, having heard that we teach that good works do not make a sinner pious, do not blot out sins, and do not reconcile us to God. To this the devil adds his supplement and despises good works, so much so that he would sell them all for one farthing. . . . We teach that to reconcile God, to make pious, to blot out sin is so high, great, and glorious a work that alone Christ, the Son of God, could do it and that this is really a pure, special, peculiar work of the one true God and His grace, in comparison with which our works are nothing and can do nothing. But that for this reason good works should amount to, and be worth, nothing, who ever has taught or heard such a thing except out of the lying mouth of the devil? I would not give one of my sermons, not one of my lectures, not one of my writings, not one of my Lord's Prayers, indeed, not even the least of the good works I have done or yet do for all the goods of the world; yes, I regard it [each of these good works] greater than my own life, which certainly is dearer to every one, and must be dearer, than the whole world; for each is a good work which God has done through and in me. But if God has done it, and if it is God's work, what is the whole world compared with God and His work? And though I am not made pious through such works, - for that can be done alone through Christ's blood and righteousness, without works,- nevertheless they are done to the praise and glory of God and to the benefit and weal of my neighbor, so that not even a single one of them could be paid for by the whole world or compared with those of the world. And this fine rabble would take only a farthing for them! Oh, how well Satan has hidden himself here! Who could not detect him here ?"

This high estimate of the value of Christian good works is in full agreement with the clear teaching of Scripture. Christian good works are indeed of great value, and this for the following reasons: -

## a. They are done according to the norm of God's Law.
a. They are done according to the norm of Goa: s Law. While all works that are not done according to God's will are worthless and displeasing to God, those which are accomplished according to His will are esteemed by Him as infinitely precious in His sight, Rev. 2, 2 ff.

## b. They are God's own works in us;
b. They are Golfs own works in us; for He is the efficient Cause (causa efficiens) of all Christian good works, Phil. 2, 13; 2 Cor. 3, 5; 1 Cor. 12, 6-11; Eph. 2, 10. While all "good works" that are done by men to merit salvation are condemned in Scripture as "works of the flesh," Gal. 3, 2. 3. 10, the good works of believers are praised and glorified in Holy Scripture as "fruits of the Spirit," Gal. 5, 22. 23, which God Himself works in them to His glory, Eph. 2, 10; Col. 1, 5. 6; 1 Tim. 6, 17-19; Titus 2, 11-14; etc.

## c. They are testimonies of the state of grace ...
c. They are tokens and testimonies (testimonia Spiritus externa) of the state of grace into which the believer has been placed through faith in Christ, Luke 7, 47; 1 John 3, 14. As such they are of great value to the believer himself, Rev. 2, 19, and to all other men, Matt. 5, 16.

## d. They are imperishable...
d. They are imperishable, following the believer into eternal life, where they are rewarded most graciously, Rev. 14, 13; Matt. 5, 12; 19, 29; 10, 42; Gal. 6, 9, while all earthly works will be consumed by fire on the Last Day, Matt. 24, 35; 1 Cor. 7, 31; 2 Pet. 3, 10.

## e. God defers Judgment Day
e. On account of the good works of believers, of which the preaching of the Gospel is the foremost, God defers Judgment Day, Matt. 24, 14; 1 Pet. 2, 9. For this reason Christians should at all times be most diligent in performing good works, Gal. 6, 10; Eph. 5, 16; Col. 4, 5, and Christian ministers should constantly inculcate them, Titus 3, 8; 1 Tim. 6, 17 ff.

## f. The performance of good works...
f. The performance of good works is the real objective of the Christian's life on earth. As soon as a person has become a believer in Christ, he no longer belongs to this world, but to the kingdom of heaven, Phil. 3, 20; John 5, 24. But God wants His saints to live on earth for a while in order that they may serve Christ, publish His Gospel, and perform many good works to the praise of His name, Matt. 5, 13-16. From all this it is evident that Christian good works (opera spiritualia) are indeed of the greatest value. Luther says [St. L., I, 867](https://archive.org/details/st-l-01-en/page/n459/mode/2up){:target="_blank"}: "The works which we do in our calling through faith in the Son of God shine before God, the holy angels, and the whole Church."