---
title: 5. JUSTIFICATION ON THE BASIS OF WORKS.
description: 
---

In some places, Scripture teaches also a **justification on the basis of works**[^1], namely, `the justification before men`. When we speak of justification in this signification, we use the term in **a wider sense**. The true justification, which is before God (_ἐνώπιον ϑεοῦ_) and by which a sinner becomes a child of God, is by faith, without the deeds of the Law, [Rom. 3, 20—22](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Romans%203%3A20-22&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="For by works of the law no human being will be justified in his sight, since through the law comes knowledge of sin. The Righteousness of God Through Faith But now the righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law, although the Law and the Prophets bear witness to it — the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no distinction"}. However, such faith is known only to God; before men it remains invisible. For this reason God justifies His believing saints before men by their works; that is to say, He proves their faith and justification by their fruits, [Luke 7, 47](https://biblehub.com/crossref/luke/7-47.htm){:target="_blank" title="Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven—for she loved much. But he who is forgiven little, loves little."}; [John 13, 35](https://biblehub.com/crossref/john/13-35.htm){:target="_blank" title="By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another"}; [Matt. 12, 37](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew%2012%3A33-37&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="(33) Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad, for the tree is known by its fruit. (34) You brood of vipers! How can you speak good, when you are evil? ... (37) for by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned."}; [25, 34—40](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew%2025%3A34-40&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me food, ..."}. So also all Christians should recognize their state of grace by the fruits which the Holy Spirit has wrought in their hearts, [1 John 3, 14](https://biblehub.com/crossref/1_john/3-14.htm){:target="_blank" title="We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. Whoever does not love abides in death."}; [2, 3.4](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1%20John%202%3A3-4&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="And by this we know that we have come to know him, if we keep his commandments. Whoever says 'I know him” but does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him,"}; [2 Pet. 1, 10](https://biblehub.com/crossref/2_peter/1-10.htm){:target="_blank" title="Therefore, brothers, be all the more diligent to confirm your calling and election, for if you practice these qualities you will never fall."}; [Matt. 6, 14](https://biblehub.com/crossref/matthew/6-14.htm){:target="_blank" title="For if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you,"}. 

## Apology: Of Love and the Fulfilling of the Law

The _Apology_ remarks very correctly [Art. III, 154](https://boc.confident.faith/ap-v-0154){:target="_blank" title="Art. V (III); Of Love and the Fulfilling of the Law"}: 

> “Christ often connects the promise of the remission of sins with good works, not because He means that good works are a propitiation, for they follow reconciliation; but for two reasons. One is, because good fruits must necessarily follow. Therefore He reminds us that, if good fruits do not follow, the repentance is hypocritical and feigned. The other reason is, because we have need of external signs of so great a promise, because a conscience full of fear has need of manifold consolation. As therefore Baptism and the Lord’s Supper are signs that continually admonish, cheer, and encourage desponding minds to believe the more firmly that their sins are forgiven, so the same promise is written and portrayed in good works in order that these works may admonish us to believe the more firmly.” 

The justification on the ground of works thus coincides with the external testimony of the Holy Ghost (_testimonium externum sive indirectum_), which we distinguish from His internal testimony (_testimonium internum sive directum_), or faith. 

## Inward and outward forgiveness

However, justification by faith and justification by works must not be mingled together, [Gal. 3, 10](https://biblehub.com/crossref/galatians/3-10.htm){:target="_blank" title="For all who rely on works of the law are under a curse; for it is written, “Cursed be everyone who does not abide by all things written in the Book of the Law, and do them."}. By the former the sinner obtains salvation; by the latter he is proved an heir of salvation. In order to make this matter clear, Luther sometimes speaks of `inward and outward forgiveness`. By the former he means justification before God; by the latter, justification before men. By the former a sinner becomes a child of God; by the latter he is proved a child of God. It is the basic error of Romanism to regard justification by works as the ground of a sinner’s justification and thus to make salvation depend on good works. 

## The demands of the Law

It is evident that the doctrine of justification by faith (_sola fide_) cannot be taught in its purity unless the Scriptural distinction between the Law and the Gospel is observed. The Law must never be mingled with justification, since this gracious act of God belongs entirely in the Gospel. But the Law is mingled with justification whenever the latter is based, either in whole or in part, upon some natural or spiritual virtue in man or when faith is said to justify as a “good quality” or as the source of sanctification or as compliance with `the demands of the Law` or as the beginning of the Christian’s new life, etc. In short, the Law is mingled with justification whenever justification is grounded, in whole or in part, on human works (Pelagians, synergists, Arminians). 

## Don't loose the assurance of salvation

Such mingling of the Law with justification destroys, of course, the blessed consolation which God has intended to bestow upon men by the glorious doctrine of justification by faith. While the doctrine of justification by faith gives the believer full assurance of salvation, that of justification by works removes this assurance; for it takes salvation out of the gracious hand of God and places it in man’s own sinful and impotent hand. It is a significant fact that all errorists who deny the _sola fide_ deny also **the Scriptural truth that a believer may be sure of his salvation**. 

## The anathema of the Council of Trent upon all true Christians

Foremost among these errorists is the Pope, whom Luther exposed as the Antichrist, showing him to be such not because of his unholy works, but mainly because of his shameful perversion of the Scriptural doctrine of salvation by grace through faith in Christ. Luther’s assertion as to the Pope’s being the Antichrist spoken of in [2 Thess. 2](https://biblehub.com/crossref/2_thessalonians/2-10.htm){:target="_blank" title="and with all wicked deception for those who are perishing, because they refused to love the truth and so be saved."} is correct; for to this day the anathema of the Council of Trent upon all true Christians who adhere to the Scriptural doctrine of justification by faith is upheld by the Church of Rome. 

[^1]: [Pieper](https://archive.org/details/pieper-cdk-2-001-672-deep-l-en/page/527/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Vol. II/III, Page 528-529"} reminds us that Luther and the old theologians believed that _"faith"_ is work 
(in a comment on his own postulate that "Faith is merely instrumental to the attainment of justification and salvation.", to an expression called ‘concentrated gospel’): 
It has also been pointed out that **faith can also be called a "work" or "doing" of man, and was so called by Luther and the old Lutheran theologians,** precisely in so far as faith takes hold of the grace of God 
and is distinguished from the works and virtues which it works in the justified. This is true. Luther says on [Gen. 15, 6](https://biblehub.com/crossref/genesis/15-6.htm){:target="_blank" title="And he believed the LORD, and he counted it to him as righteousness."}: 
"Now say clearly what faith alone does, not what virtues it is associated with. Faith alone grasps the promise, believes God in his promise, and by offering him something, God reaches out and accepts it. Such a work belongs to faith alone as peculiar to it (_hoc proprium solius fidei opus_). Love, hope and patience deal with other things. 
[St. L. I, 946 f](https://archive.org/details/st-l-01-en/page/n499/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="(93). Now say here clearly and plainly, what faith does and works in itself alone, and not with what virtues or works it is surrounded and adorned. Now faith takes hold of the promise for itself alone, believes God's promise and, since God offers and gives it something, it reaches out for it and accepts it. Such is the work of faith alone. But love, hope, patience, and other works deal with other things..."}. 
And on [Jn 6:28.29](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John%206%3A28-29&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="Then they said to him, “What must we do, to be doing the works of God?”  Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent."} Luther says: 
Christ "speaks of the work that we are to do, which is to believe. For faith is a work that must be done by a human being. ([Vol. VII, page 2213, section 44.](https://archive.org/details/st-l-07-deep-l-en/page/n1119/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="... So speak fully of the work that we are to do, namely, to believe. For faith is a work that must be done by a man, and is also called God's work. ..."})