---
title:  5. THE FINAL JUDGMENT.
description: De Iudicio Extremo.
---

Immediately upon the second advent of Christ and the resurrection of the dead there will follow the final Judgment (Matt. 26,  31. 32: “When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, . . . then  shall He sit upon the throne of His glory, and before Him shall  be gathered all nations”). This immediate connection of the  second coming of Christ with the general resurrection and the final  Judgment excludes every possibility of a millennium; for when  Scripture speaks of the last things ex professo (sedes doctrinae),  it leaves no room for a chiliastic earthly kingdom of Christ. 

Those who will be judged are all men without exception, the  pious as well as the impious, 2 Cor. 5,10; Rom. 14,10, the living  as well as the dead, Acts 10, 42, as also the evil angels, 2 Pet. 2,4;  Jude 6. The basis of Christ’s judgment will be His revealed truth,  the Word of God, as Scripture clearly attests, Kom. 2, 16; John  12,48; Rev. 20,12. The norm of judgment (norma iudicii) will  be the works of men, 2 Cor. 5, 10; Matt. 25, 35—45. But the  righteous will be judged only according to their good works, Matt.  25, 34—40; Rev. 12,11, since their evil works, or sins, have been  cast into the depths of the sea, Micah 7,19, or forgiven. 

When, on the one hand, Holy Scripture declares that all men  will be judged (2 Cor. 5,10; Rom. 14,10: “we,” that is, believers),  and, on the other, that the believer in Christ will not come into  condemnation (John 5, 24: εἰς κρίσιν οὐκ ἔρχεται), this seeming  contradiction is the old contradiction between the Law and the  Gospel. According to the Law all men must appear before the  judgment-seat of Christ. According to the Gospel the believers  shall not come into condemnation. The appearance of the believers before God’s judgment-seat will therefore not have the  nature of a condemnatory judgment since their sins are forgiven  through faith in Christ, Matt. 25, 34. 

Gerhard rightly remarks that also the eschatological teachings  of Christ are both Law and Gospel and that also in this case the  Law admonishes and warns all Christians so far as they are flesh, 2 Cor. 5,10; Rom. 14,10, while the Gospel comforts them in their  fears and doubts, Luke 21, 28. Luther declares (St. L., VII,  1794 f.): “The Judgment pertains to the believers as little as it  does to the holy angels. All believers enter out of this life into  the kingdom of heaven without judgment and are even the judges  of others.” This statement is true; for Christ expressly declares  that the righteous will be separated from the unrighteous before  the Judgment begins, Matt. 25, 32. 33. 

According to Scripture the Judgment is not a long-drawn-out  process (indicium, discussionis)j but a momentary event (actio  momentanea), Matt. 24, 27; Luke 17, 24. It takes place ἐν ἀτόμῳ, in an instant, ἐν ῥιπῇ ὀφϑαλμοῦ, in the twinkling of an eye,  1 Cor. 15, 51. 52. 

That the righteous shall judge the world with Christ is a clear  doctrine of Scripture, 1 Cor. 6, 2—4. They will judge the world  and the evil angels, inasmuch as they cooperate in Christ’s decisions and support His verdict (assessores). This great dignity,  which Christ confers upon them out of pure grace, should prompt  them to judge rightly between their brethren already in this life,  1 Cor. 6, 5. 
