---
title:   7. ETERNAL DAMNATION.
description: De Damnatione Aeterna.
---

At the last Judgment a complete and eternal separation takes  place between the ungodly and the godly. Matt. 25,46: “These  shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into  life eternal ." 

The fact that there will be an everlasting punishment may be  deduced to some extent also from the natural knowledge which  man has of divine things, Rom. 1,18—21. The knowledge of God’s  judgment (δικαίωμαὶ) is a part of the divine Law which God has  written in the human heart, Rom. 1, 32. On the basis of the Law,  conscience condemns the sinful acts of man as transgressions, for  which he is held accountable to God, Rom. 2,15; 1,20. 32. Hence  also among the heathen we find a certain doctrine of an eternal  retribution, though this, of course, is distorted by many fanciful  speculations. (Cf. Christl. Dogmatik, III, 611 f.) 

Holy Scripture teaches the doctrine of eternal damnation so  clearly and definitely that only those can rightly deny it who reject  the divine authority of God’s Word (cf. the doctrine of restitution, ἀποκατάστασις τῶν πάντων, παλιγγενεσία, τοϑρίϊειεϊο οπιπὶωπι). If  any one presumes to reject the everlasting punishment (εἰς κόλασιν αἰώνιον), he must reject also the everlasting life (εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον), since both are placed side by side, indeed, in contrast to each other,  Matt. 25, 46; John 3, 36. 

While it is true that the term eternity is sometimes used in  Scripture in the weakened sense of “long duration” (עַד-עוּלם, Ex. 12,14. 24; 21, 6, etc.), it is employed in its strict sense (sine  fine) in all those passages where it describes either the blessedness 



634 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (eSOHATOLOQT). 


of God’s saints in heaven or the misery of the damned in hell,  2 Thess. 1, 9; Matt. 18, 8; Mark 3, 29. 

In addition, the endless duration of the agonies of the damned  is clearly described in other unmistakable terms (Is. 66, 24; Mark  9, 48: “where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched”;  Rev. 14,11: “The smoke of their torment ascendeth up forever and  ever; and they have no rest day nor night”; Rev. 20,10: “And  shall be tormented day and night forever and ever”). 

The Augsburg Confession therefore justly condemns all who  deny the eternal punishment of Satan and his followers when it  writes (Art. XVII): “They condemn the Anabaptists, who think  that there will be an end to the punishments of condemned men  and devils.” Also the Apology declares (Art. XVII, Triglot,  p. 335): “At the consummation of the world Christ shall appear  and shall raise up all the dead and shall give to the godly eternal  life and eternal joys, but shall condemn the ungodly to be punished  with the devil without end (sine fine)." 

If the objection is raised that the very idea of an eternal punishment is so dreadful that it cannot be true, we reply that it is  not for finite man, but for the infinite God to determine the punishment of those who have rebelled against Him, Jude 6—8. 

The argument that the idea of an eternal punishment is irreconcilable with divine love or with divine justice or with the unity  of the divine “world-plan” (the final conversion of the penitent in  hell and the annihilation of the impenitent) is based upon human  speculation and not upon God’s Word, so that it is worthless, since  God cannot be judged by our feeble sense, 1 Tim. 6, 16; Rom.  11, 33—36. 

While the terms שאוּל and ἄδης may denote either the state  of death or the grave, Ps. 16, 10; Acts 2, 27. 31, they properly  signify “the place (ποῦν) in which the wicked suffer and in all  eternity sustain the most miserable condition and ineffable tortures”  (Gerhard). (Cp. Deut. 32, 22; Ps. 49, 14; Prov. 15, 24; Matt.  11, 23; Luke 10, 15; 16, 23; etc.) 

Against the Russellites, who claim that neither שאוּל and ἄδης  can mean hell in the sense of “the place of the damned,” we reply  that we do not depend on these terms alone to prove the existence  of hell, since the doctrine of an eternal punishment is otherwise  clearly taught in Scripture (cp. γέεννα, Matt. 5, 22; Mark 9, 43. 44;  Luke 12, 5). 

The valley of Hinnom (Gehinnom) near Jerusalem, with its 



THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (eSOHATOLOGT). 


635 


ceaselessly burning fires to consume the city offal, was surely a fitting symbol of the eternal hell-fire, “where their worm dieth not  and their fire is not quenched.” It is certainly most impressive  that our beloved Savior, who is Love (1 John 4, 8), Himself taught  the eternal punishment of the damned so persistently and emphatically, Matt. 5, 29. 30; 10,28; 11,23; Luke 16,23. The eternal  punishment of the damned is proved also by Christ’s descent into  hell (τοῖς ἐν φυλακῇ πνεύμασιν... ἀπειϑήσασιν), 1 Pet. 3,18—20. 

Upon the basis of clear Scripture-passages we teach that the  form (forma), or essence, of the eternal damnation consists in everlasting banishment from divine grace and communion, or in the  everlasting separation of the damned from God’s love and mercy,  Matt. 25, 41; 8,12; 2 Thess. 1, 7—9. Originally man was created  for communion with God, and in this alone he finds supreme happiness, John 17,20—23; Ps. 17,15; Matt. 11, 28f. Hence separation from God, the Supreme Good (summum bonum) and the only  Source of every good and perfect gift, Jas. 1,17, in itself means  suffering the greatest bodily and spiritual anguish. 

Holy Scripture, moreover, very carefully describes the unspeakable sufferings of the damned as “tribulation and anguish”  (Rom. 2, 9), “being in torments” (Luke 16, 23), “being tormented  in this flame” (Luke 16,24), “being cast into unquenchable fire,  where the worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched” (Mark  9,43. 44), “weeping and gnashing of teeth” (Matt. 8,12), “wailing  and gnashing of teeth” (Matt. 13, 50), etc. In short, Scripture  employs the strongest terms to show that the sufferings of the  damned in soul and body are the greatest conceivable. In fact,  they surpass our feeble understanding, since they are both continuous and everlasting, the fire burning endlessly and yet not consuming, Mark 3,29. 

While the suffering of the body in hell-fire will be extreme,  the soul will be perpetually tortured with the sense of God’s wrath  (sensus irae) and His eternal condemnation, Gal. 3,10, as also by  the terrors of a fully awakened conscience (terrores conscientiae),  Luke 16, 27. 28. Hollaz adds the pertinent remark that “the tortures of hell will befall the souls of the damned as soon as they  have departed from the body,” i. e., in death, Luke 16, 23. 

To describe the torments of the damned more accurately, our  dogmaticians divide them into privative and positive sufferings.  The privative sufferings include a) forfeiture of the beatific sight  of God, Matt. 25, 41; b) separation from the communion of the 



636 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE LA8T THINGS (ESCHATOLOGY). 


blessed. Luke 16,26: c) exclusion from heavenly light, rest, and  happiness, Matt. 8,12; d) entire denial of pity, divine and human,  Luke 16, 25. 26; and e) complete lack of everything that might  comfort them, Rev. 6,16.17. 

The positive sufferings are both internal and external. The  internal are the most inexplicable pains and tortures of the soul,  Mark 9, 44, and the external, their association with devils, Matt.  25, 41, their everlasting confinement in a place of unspeakable  sorrow. Matt. 25, 30; 1 Pet. 3,18—20, and their ceaseless torments  in fire that burns, but does not consume, Luke 16,23. 24; Rev. 14,  10.11; 20,10.15. 

Whether the fire of hell is material (real fire) or immaterial  (unspeakable torment) does not matter, for even in its figurative  meaning (Gerhard, Quenstedt) the term denotes indescribable  anguish and agony. Is. 66, 24. Our dogmaticians rightly warn all  curious minds that it is much more profitable to seek to escape the  agony of hell than to argue concerning what the fire of hell may be  (Gerhard). 

Dr. Pieper aptly remarks that in hell there will be no atheists,  since their torment in endless punishment will convince them of  the existence of a righteous and omnipotent Judge, whose sovereignty must be recognized, Luke 16, 27. 28. 

The question whether the damned in hell will continue in sin  may be affirmed in the sense that their entire moral condition of  reprobation (lack of faith, hope, and inward obedience) is a ceaseless state of transgression. To this we may add that the fire of  hell is not cleansing (hell is no purgatory), but punitive, so that  the damned will not be morally improved by it. Hence, if they do  acknowledge God’s majesty, they will do so only under coercion  in endless agony. 

That the damned will actually blaspheme God is hardly probable, Luke 16, 27. 28. The passage Rev. 16,11 no doubt refers to  men who blaspheme God on account of the tribulations of this  present life. 

That the punishments of hell differ in degree , according to the  quality and measure of sin, Scripture teaches very plainly, Matt.  11,24; Luke 12,47; Matt. 23,15. The sin that will be punished  most severely is that of malicious opposition to the Gospel of Christ,  Matt. 11,16—24. 

While on the basis of clear Scripture-passages we speak of hell  as a place, Luke 16, 28; 1 Pet. 3,19, this must not be understood 



THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (E8CHATOLOGY). 


637 


in a physical sense. Nor are we to determine where this place is,  since Scripture does not give us any information on this matter.  Hell may be said to be where God reveals to the damned His eternal  punitive justice by banishing them from His gracious countenance  (Pieper). Quenstedt quotes Chrysostom on this point, who says:  “Let us not seek where it is, but how we may escape it.” 

Hollaz concludes the whole matter with the fitting remark:  “It is certain that the infernal prison is a real locality, Luke 16, 28;  1 Pet. 3,19, separated from the abode of the blessed, Rev. 22,15;  Luke 16,23. It is also probable that it is outside this habitable  world, 2 Pet. 3,10; Matt. 8,12; but where this place definitely is,  is unknown to men during the present life.” (Doctr. Theol.,  p. 658.) 

With respect to the cause of eternal damnation it is clear that,  while every sin (both original, Eph. 2, 3, and actual, Ezek. 18, 20)  is by its very nature (natura sua, ut stc, meritorie) damnable,  1 Cor. 5,11; Rev. 21, 8; Gal. 3,10, it is, in the final analysis, the  sin of unbelief that actually condemns, John 3,16—18. 36; Mark  16, 16. Through His vicarious atonement (satisfactio vicaria)  Christ has secured perfect reconciliation for all men with God,  so that in Him every sinner in this world is absolved from all  transgressions, 2 Cor. 5, 19—21 (objective justification). Hence  a sinner is punished eternally only if he refuses to accept God’s  gracious forgiveness by faith in Christ. This is an offense so great  that it is rightly punished with everlasting damnation in hell. 

However, if a sinner refuses to accept God’s gracious pardon  in Christ Jesus, then both his original sin and his actual sins will  also condemn him, since he can never atone for them, and so they  are forever charged against him. It is for this reason that Scripture, on the one hand, ascribes eternal damnation to the sin of  unbelief, John 3,18, and, on the other, also to all other sins, Eph.  5, 6; Gal. 5,19—21; 1 Cor. 6, 9.10; Rev. 22,15. 

If we bear in mind the explanation just given, we shall neither  minimize the vicarious atonement of Christ (by teaching work-  righteousness) nor the condemnable character of human transgression (Rom. 6, 1: “Shall we continue in sin that grace may  abound?”), but we shall trust the more in Christ Jesus, our divine  Savior, and in the power of faith flee and combat sin, Rom. 6,  2, 11—15. 

The purpose of Holy Scripture in revealing to us the doctrine  of eternal damnation is to warn us against both unbelief (Mark 16,16) and carnal security (Matt. 26,41; 1 Cor. 10,12) and so to  move us to seek Christ’s gracious salvation, offered to all men in  the means of grace. The doctrine of eternal damnation is the  severest kind of Law-preaching, and its object is repentance,  Matt. 3, 7—12. 

The warning, implied in the doctrine of everlasting punishment, is, however, meant not only for unbelievers, but also for  believers inasmuch as they still are flesh (Matt. 8,11.12, addressed  to “the children of the Kingdom”; 26, 24, addressed to Judas;  24,42—51, addressed to the disciples). 

```
Mors tua, indicium postremum, gloria coeli, 
Et dolor inferni sunt meditanda tibi. 
```

While the doctrine of hell will never convert a soul, since the  Law only “worketh wrath,” Rom. 4, 15, it is nevertheless “our  schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ that we might be justified  by faith,” Gal. 3, 24. Hence all preachers who deny the eternal  punishment of the wicked are not “merciful theologians” (misericordes theologi), but the most cruel of all false prophets, who,  instead of warning the sinner against his terrible doom, Ezek. 3,  17—19, do all in their power “to drown men in destruction and  perdition,” 1 Tim. 6, 3—5. Christ and His holy apostles taught  the doctrine of eternal retribution with great clearness and emphasis, Mark 9, 43 ff.; 2 TheBS. 2, 9, and their example every Christian preacher must follow as a faithful minister of Christ and  a loyal steward of God’s mysteries, 1 Cor. 4,1. 2. 

The doctrine of eternal damnation serves also to illustrate  God’s righteous judgment over all transgressors, Rom. 2, 5. 6; 3,4.  But since God earnestly desires that all men be saved (voluntas  antecedcns), John 3, 16, it is only by His voluntas consequens,  John 3,18. 36, that He exhibits and glorifies His righteous wrath  and punishment. 

The Calvinistic doctrine of a reprobation to hell “from eternity” is unscriptural. God never intended man for hell, but only  for heaven, 1 Tim. 2, 4—6. 

The doctrine of eternal damnation is denied by the Restorationists, who teach that the future punishment is not retributive,  but remedial and will result in the salvation of all men and,  as some hold, of the evil angels. (Restitution of all things; ἀποκατάστασις; second probation). Likewise it is denied by the  Annihilationists, who teach that the wicked will be completely destroyed either at the Judgment or later. Both errors are opposed  to the clear statements of Scripture. 
