---
title:   8. ETERNAL SALVATION.
description: De Beatitudine Aeterna.
---

## a. The fact of eternal salvation.

That there is an everlasting  life in glory and bliss for all true believers in Christ Jesus is the  culmination of all Gospel revelation in Holy Scripture, Rom.  5,1.2; Eph. 2,4—6. The explanation of the Second Article of  the Creed thus says: “I believe that Jesus Christ has redeemed  me . . . that I may be His own and live under Him in His kingdom  and serve Him in everlasting righteousness, innocence, and blessed-,  ness, even as He is risen from the dead, lives, and reigns to all  eternity.” So also the Formula of Concord (Thor. Decl., XI,  14—22): “God in His purpose and counsel [of grace] ordained  that finally He will eternally save and glorify in life eternal those  whom He has elected, called, and justified.” 

The blessed doctrine of life eternal through faith in Christ  cannot be learned from reason since it belongs to “the wisdom of  God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained  before the world unto our glory,” 1 Cor. 2, 7—9. 

The Christian hope of eternal life (John 17, 3) must therefore not be confounded with the pagan doctrine of the immortality  of the soul or of its continued existence after death, which even  human reason may excogitate. Concerning the arguments for the  immortality of the soul we may note the following: a) “Since the  soul is immaterial and simple, it is indissoluble” (Plato, Leibniz;  the metaphysical proof) ; b) “The rich capacities of the soul cannot be satisfactorily developed in this life; its destiny must therefore be extended to a future life” (Cicero, Lotze; teleological  proof); c) “Man strives after virtue as well as after happiness;  but this life affords no satisfaction with regard to either” (Kant;  argumentum ethonomicum) ; d) “Love for country is inspired only  by the promise of life beyond death” (J. G. Fichte; argumentum  iuridicum) ; e) “All men by nature believe in the immortality of  the soul” (Homer, Vergil, Cicero; argumentum e consensu gentium; cp. Doctr.Theol., p. 631f.). 

However, all the “heavens” of the heathen (unbelievers) are  man-made and are just as much a caricature of the heaven of Scripture as every man-made savior is a caricature of the divine Savior.  Though the heathen have always speculated on the immortality of  the soul, St. Paul bears witness that despite their eschatological  speculations they are “without God,” “having no hope ... in the  world,” Eph. 2,12. Karl Hase rightly states that “in the hovel of  the poorest peasant there is a stronger faith in an eternal life than 



640 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (ESCHATOLOGY). 


in the lecture halls of the greatest philosophers.” (Cf. Christl.  Dogmatik, III, 619.) 

Only he can in reality have the hope of eternal life who truly  believes in Christ Jesus, God’s only-begotten Son, and in His  vicarious death for the sins of the world, John 3,16; 11, 23—27.  Even the “sweetest thoughts” on the future life of the soul are  dreadful without faith in Christ, since they can never silence the  accusing and condemning voice of conscience, Rom. 2,16.16. 

## b. What eternal life is (forma beatitudinis aetemae).

According to Holy Scripture the life eternal which Christ will graciously  bestow upon His followers consists in the perpetual beatific vision  of God, Job 19, 25—27; Acts 7, 56; Matt. 5, 8; 2 Cor. 5, 1—6;  1 Cor. 13,12; 1 John 3, 2. In this life Christian believers see God  only through faith by means of His Word, and, as it were, in an  image, 1 Cor. 13,12 (cognitio Dei abstractiva); but in heaven they  will behold Him without an image or veil, face to face (cognitio  Dei intuitiva). 

This beholding of God is beatific, that is, it is joined with  supreme bliss, Ps. 17,15, so that the blessed will never desire any  other happiness than that of seeing God, the Supreme Good and  Source of all perfect enjoyment. From this it follows that they  can never fall away from Him, but they are confirmed in their  heavenly glory (Rev. 14,13; John 10,27—29; Ps. 16,11; John  17, 24; Rev. 7, 9—17). There will be no spiritual foe to interfere  with their bliss (Rev. 20,10). 

Quenstedt describes the everlasting happiness of the blessed as  follows: “The form [of eternal life] consists, generally speaking,  in the ineffable, most full, and never-ending reception of incomprehensible blessings. The blessings of eternal life are either  privative or positive. 

“The privative blessings are the absence of sin and of all causes  of sin, namely, the flesh inciting, the devil suggesting, the world  seducing, and of the punishments of sin, such as various calamities,  18.25,8; 49,10; Rev. 21, 4; temporal death, Hos. 13,14; 1 Cor.  15, 26. 55—57; Rev. 2, 7, and eternal damnation, Rev. 2, 11;  20,14. Here also belongs immunity from the affections and actions  of the animal body as such, as, for example, hunger, thirst, eating,  drinking, the use of marriage, etc., Rev. 7,16.17; Matt. 22, 30. 

“Some of the positive blessings of life eternal are internal,  while others are external. The internal positive blessings, among  which the beatific and immediate sight of God is preeminent,  belong to the entire composite being and affect both body and soul 



THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (ESCHATOLOGY). 


641 


of the blessed. The internal blessings of either part of the composite being belong either to the soul or to the body. Those of  the soul are: a) the perfect enlightenment of the intellect, 1 Cor.  13, 9—12; b) complete rectitude of the will as well as the appetite,  Ps. 17,15; Eph. 5, 27; c) the highest security concerning the perpetual duration of this blessedness, John 16, 22. Those of the body  are: a) spirituality, 1 Cor. 15, 44. 47; Phil. 3, 21; b) invisibility,  1 Cor. 15, 44; c) impalpability, 1 Cor. 15, 44. 48; d) illocality  (ibid.); e) subtility (ibid.); f) agility, 1 Thess. 4,17; g) impassibility, Rev. 7, 16; 21,4; h) immortality and incorruptibility,  1 Cor. 16, 42—48.53; 2 Cor. 5, 4; i) strength and soundness,  1 Cor. 15, 43; j) brilliancy, Dan. 12, 3; Matt. 13, 43; 1 Cor. 16,  41.43; k) beauty, 1 Cor. 15, 43; Phil. 3, 21. 

“The external positive blessings are those which the blessed  experience deeply outside of themselves. Of these two are chief:  a) the most delightful communion with God, Luke 23, 43; John  12, 26; 14, 3; 17, 24; 2 Cor. 5, 8; Phil. 1, 23; 1 Thess. 4, 17;  Rev. 21, 3, with the angels, Heb. 12, 22, and with all the blessed,  Matt. 8, 11; Luke 13, 29; Heb. 12, 23, consisting in the mutual  presence, the most agreeable conversations, and the rendering of  mutual honor, joined with mutual love; and b) a most beautiful  and magnificent abode.” (Doctr. Theol., p. 661 f.) 

With respect to the beatific vision, Scripture teaches that this  is accomplished not merely by means of mental contemplation  (visio mentalis), but by the actual sight of the eyes (visio cor-  poralis), 1 Cor. 9,12; Job 19, 25—27; 1 John 3,2. Those who  doubt the possibility of the beatific vision may just as well doubt  the possibility of all of heaven, since the entire doctrine of eternal  life transcends our feeble understanding. That the blessed in  heaven will recognize not only God, but one another is plainly  taught in Scripture, Matt. 17, 3. 4; Rev. 7, 13. 14. Hafenreffer  writes: “Because the perfect image of God in which we had been  created will be fully restored, we shall be endowed also with perfect wisdom and knowledge. Hence, if Adam before the Fall immediately recognized his rib in Eve, much more in the life to come,  when all these gifts will be far more perfect, shall we recognize  one another, Luke 16, 23 ; Matt. 17,1 ff.” (Doctr. Theol., p. 662.) 

Whether the blessed will recognize the damned in hell is not  certain, though it is quite probable, Luke 16, 23 ff. Dr. Pieper  wisely suggests that it is best to leave this question unanswered.  That such recognition, if it should occur, does not disturb the 

41 


CHRISTIAN DOGMATICS. 



642 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (ESCHATOLOGY). 


happiness of the saints, Hutter explains as follows: “The will of  the blessed will in all things concur with that of God. Such carnal  affections as are signs of our weakness in this life will entirely  cease in the life to come, when our love will extend to those who  are beloved of God and whom He has made heirs of everlasting  life. But in the damned they will supremely admire and eternally  praise the exalted justice of God.” (Doctr.Theol ., p. 662.) 

## c. How Scripture describes life eternal.

Gerhard rightly suggests that what eternal life is can be known from the revelation  of the Word only in a general and obscure manner (mViy/iarixmc).  As a matter of fact, while Holy Scripture speaks of eternal life in  many places, it does not supply us with many details regarding  its exalted nature. This method of teaching the Holy Spirit has  chosen designedly; for in this life we have no adequate conception  of the nature of things that lie beyond space and time. 

Nevertheless the description of eternal life which God’s Word  provides is sufficient to give us a foretaste of the coming glory,  Kom. 8,18, and to make us long for heaven, Phil. 1, 23. Negatively Scripture describes the blessedness of God’s saints in heaven  as complete freedom from all the ills of this life, 2 Tim. 4,18; Rev.  7, 16. 17; 21, 4; positively, as supreme and perfect bliss, 1 Pet.  1,8.9; Ps. 16,11; John 17,24. Moreover, Scripture depicts the  perfect joy of eternal life by means of symbols that give us a foretaste of heaven’s perfect glory (Matt. 25,10; Rev. 19, 9 : marriage;  Luke 13,29; Matt. 8, 11: a feast of joy; Luke 22, 30: sitting  upon thrones). That these pictures must not be explained in  a physical or earthly sense Scripture expressly shows, Luke 22,  24—30; Matt. 22, 30. 

However, not only the soul, but also the body will share in  the eternal bliss of heaven, 1 Cor. 15,44; for it shall be like the  glorified body of Christ, Phil. 3, 21, and shall shine as the sun,  Matt. 13, 43, being free from all consequences of sin, 1 Cor.  15, 42. 43. 

The language which will be used in heaven is not earthly, but  heavenly, so that it cannot be known upon earth (2 Cor. 12, 4:  “unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter”). 

While there are no degrees of bliss, since all the saints of  Christ shall see God and so will be completely blessed, Scripture  teaches that there are degrees of glory (<5o£a, gloria), commensurate with the faithfulness and sufferings of Christian believers  in this life, 2 Cor. 9, 6; 1 Cor. 15, 41. 42 ; Dan. 12, 3. (Omnibus 

una salus sanctis, sed gloria dispar; cp. Luther, St. L., VIII, 



THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (E80HAT0L0GY). 


643 


1223 f.) These differences in glory will of course not arouse envy,  since jealousy is sin, Gal. 6, 20. 21, and sin will be completely  abolished in heaven, Ps. 17,16; 16,11. 

Heaven indeed must be conceived of as a certain place (nov ),  where the blessed will see God and perfectly enjoy supreme glory.  Matt. 5, 12; 6, 20; 1 Pet. 1, 4; Mark 16, 19; yet we must not  understand this “certain nov” in a physical sense. As the nov  damnatorum is everywhere where God reveals His eternal punitive justice, so the nov beatorum is everywhere where God reveals  His eternal grace and love in unveiled glory. Thus the angels are  always in heaven, even when they minister to the saints on earth,  Matt. 18,10; Luke 1,19. 

## d. The saints in heaven.

Scripture describes as the saints of  God who shall inherit eternal life all those who believe in Christ,  John 3,16—18. 36. For this reason it is wrong to ascribe eternal  life also to non-believers on the basis of their iustitia naturalis et  civilis (Zwingli, Hofmann; cp. Luther, St. L., XX, 1766f., against  Zwingli, who expressed the hope to find such heathen as Hercules,  Theseus, Socrates, etc., in heaven). Christ expressly commanded  His disciples to preach the Gospel to every creature, adding the  warning that whosoever believeth not shall be damned, Mark 16,  15.16; Luke 24, 47; cp. also Acts 26,18. 

That only true believers shall be eternally saved appears also  from all passages in Scripture, a) in which Christian ministers are  commanded to be faithful and diligent in their sacred office in  order that not a soul may be lost through unbelief, Ezek. 3,18.19;  2 Tim. 4,1. 2; 2, 23—26; 1 Tim. 4,15.16; b) in which all Christians are exhorted to instruct, reprove, and warn their erring  brethren lest they lose their soul’s salvation through apostasy, Matt.  18,15—17; 1 Cor. 5; and c) in which all Christians are admonished to lead a holy life lest they become guilty of any one’s damnation through the offense of denying the Christian faith and  profession, Matt. 18, 6. 7. 

## e. The purpose of the doctrine of eternal salvation.

As the  doctrine of eternal damnation serves to warn men against unbelief  and carnal security, so the doctrine of eternal life serves to incite  the believers to greater faith and to sustain them in their faithful  following of Christ, Matt. 10, 22; 24,13; Mark 13,13. A truly  Christian life is impossible without constant consideration of the  sure hope of eternal life, Phil. 3, 12—14; 1, 23. 24; Matt. 6,  19—21. (Cp. Luther, St. L., IX, 930 ff.) 


644 THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS (ESCHATOLOGY). 

In this life Christian believers do not receive that recognition  which they deserve as children of God, 1 John 3, 2, just as little as  their Savior was appreciated during His sojourn on earth, Is. 53,  1—3; John 1,10.11. Moreover, as they are hated and troubled  by "all men,” Matt. 10,22. 25; 24,9, they must endure much tribulation in general before they can enter into God’s Kingdom of  Glory, Acts 14, 22. Hence they should constantly direct their  attention to their sure inheritance in heaven in order that they  may overcome all evil and gain the eternal victory, Matt. 5, 12;  2 Cor. 4,16—18. All manner of tribulation is the earthly lot especially of the Christian ministers, 2 Tim. 2, 9; 2 Cor. 4, 7—11, since  the world detests the Gospel of Christ, 1 Cor. 1,23, and will abominate it till the end of time, 2 Tim. 4,10. 

But in all their tribulation Christian believers will overcome  and gain the victory, Rom. 8, 35—39, if after the example of the  apostle, 2 Tim. 1, 12, they continue in faith and hold fast their  Spirit-sealed hope of eternal glory, John 16, 33; 1 John 5, 4. 5;  Rev. 2, 7—11; 12,11. (Cp. Luther, St. L., II, 1237.) 

Of the practical use of the doctrine of eternal life, Gerhard  writes very beautifully: "The doctrine concerning the heaven of  the blessed and eternal life is set forth in Holy Scripture not that  we may idly dispute as theorists concerning the locality of heaven,  the beatific vision, the properties of the glorified bodies, but that,  as practical men, considering the promised joys of eternal life every  day, aye, every hour, aye, every moment, we may keep closely to  the way leading thither and carefully avoid all that may cause  delay or recall us from entrance into life eternal. 

"In 2 Cor. 4,18 the godly are well described by the apostle as  looking not at the things which are seen (τὰ βλεπόμενα), but at the  things which are not seen (τὰ μὴ βλεπόμενα). One of the ancients  who was asked what books he used in his daily studies answered  that he studied every day a book with three pages, one red, one  black, one white; that on the red page he read of our Lord’s  Passion, on the 1 lack, of the torments of the lost, and on the  white, of the joy> of the glorified, and that from this study he  derived more profit than if he would ponder all the works of the  philosophers.” (Doctr. Theol., p. 663.) 

```
“Christus gubemet mcntes nostras ad veram pietatem, 

Et restituat ecclesiae piam et perpeluam concordiam! Amen.”
```

> SOLI DEO GLORIA
