---
title: 1. SCRIPTURAL BASIS OF THE DOCTRINE.
description: De Conversione.
---

According to the express teaching of Holy Scripture it is impossible for fallen man to satisfy the demands of divine justice and to atone for his transgressions by good works, Ps. 49, 7. 8; Matt. 16, 26. On the contrary, all who seek to appease God by the works of the Law remain under the curse and condemnation of the divine Law, Gal. 3, 10. In fact, man by nature is so blinded .and corrupted by sin, 1 Cor. 2, 14; Eph. 2, 1, that his carnal heart is enmity against God, Rom. 8, 7, and therefore unable rightly to love and worship Him, 1 Cor. 10, 20; Eph. 2, 12. Man by nature is thus incapable of saving himself, Rom. 3, 10-20.

However, what man was unable to do God in His infinite mercy has accomplished for him, Rom. 8, 3. 4. Through the most perfect obedience of His beloved Son, Gal. 4, 4. 5 ; Is. 53, 4-6, He has reconciled the world unto Himself, 2 Cor. 5, 19; 1 John 2, 2, .and since He has blotted out the handwriting of the Law which was against sinful mankind, Col. 2, 13. 14, He now offers to all sinners the merits of Christ through the means of grace (the Gospel and the Sacraments), earnestly desiring (_vocatio seria_) that all men should accept the most gracious forgiveness which He offers in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 5, 20. 21. This is the Scriptural basis of **the doctrine of conversion**. In other words, conversion is possible only because Christ by His suffering and death has secured salvation for lost mankind, John 1, 29, and because God in His indescribable grace offers this salvation to all sinners as a free gift, Eph. 2, 8. 9.