---
title: 14. SYNONYMS OF CONVERSION.
description: 
---

In order that the way of salvation (_ordo salutis_), so clearly and simply set forth in God’s Word, may be presented in its Scriptural purity and truth, the theologian must fully understand in what relation conversion stands to _regeneration_, _vivification_, _resuscitation_, _illumination_, _vocation_, _repentance_, etc., all of which are terms which Scripture employs to describe the divine act of grace, by which the sinner is delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the kingdom of Christ, [Col. 1, 13](https://biblehub.com/crossref/colossians/1-13.htm){:target="_blank" title="He has delivered us from the domain of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son,"}. Actually all these terms, in their restricted sense, are synonyms of conversion, so that the distinction between them and conversion is only nominal, or logical, and not at all real. The difference which they represent lies only in the point of view from which they depict the sinner’s return to God. 

## a. Regeneration

a. _Regeneration (regeneratio)_. Regeneration in its strict sense describes the new birth, [John 3, 5. 6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John%203%3A5-6&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title=" Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit."}, which the sinner undergoes in his conversion, or the bestowal of new spiritual life through faith in Christ. According to Scripture every person is born of God who believes that Jesus is Christ, [1 John 5, 1](https://biblehub.com/crossref/1_john/5-1.htm){:target="_blank" title="Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves the Father loves whoever has been born of him."}. The term therefore in its proper application is synonymous with conversion, [Acts 11, 21](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/11-21.htm){:target="_blank" title="And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number who believed turned to the Lord."}. Hence we may say that the sinner who is converted is also regenerated, and vice versa, since the two terms designate one and the same act of the Holy Ghost, [John 1, 12.13](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John%201%3A12-13&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="But to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God, who were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God."}. Luther writes: “Whoever believes in Christ ... is born again, or born anew.” [St. L., VII, 1862](https://archive.org/details/st-l-07-deep-l-en/page/n943/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="This is what the Holy Spirit preaches in the word new birth, which he teaches and writes. Whoever believes in Christ, that he was born for us, died and was buried, and rose again from the dead, the same is born again or born anew. "}. 

The instrumental means of regeneration is the Word of God, in particular the Gospel of Christ, [1 Pet. 1, 23](https://biblehub.com/crossref/1_peter/1-23.htm){:target="_blank" title="since you have been born again, not of perishable seed but of imperishable, through the living and abiding word of God;"}, as also Baptism, [Titus 3, 5](https://biblehub.com/crossref/titus/3-5.htm){:target="_blank" title="he saved us, not because of works done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy, by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit,"}, since the latter is water “comprehended in God’s command and connected with God’s word,” that is, with the gracious divine promise of remission of sins, [Acts 2, 38](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/2-38.htm){:target="_blank" title="And Peter said to them, “Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit."}. 

## b. Vivification, or resuscitation

b. _Vivification, or resuscitation (vivificatio, resuscitatio)_. Both terms designate the transplanting of the sinner from the state of spiritual death into the state of spiritual life, [Eph. 2, 1—9](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ephesians%202%3A1-9&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="And you were dead in the trespasses and sins 2 in which you once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience"}, through faith in Christ Jesus, [Col. 2, 11—13](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Colossians%202%3A11-13&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title=" In him also you were circumcised with a circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the powerful working of God, who raised him from the dead. And you, who were dead in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made alive together with him, having forgiven us all our trespasses,"}. Hence also these terms are synonyms of conversion. The _Formula of Concord_ affirms [Thor. Decl., II, 87](https://boc.confident.faith/sd-ii-0087){:target="_blank" title="For the conversion of our corrupt will, which is nothing else than a resuscitation of it from spiritual death, is only and solely the work of God (just as also the resuscitation in the resurrection of the body must be ascribed to God alone), as has been fully set forth above and proved by manifest testimonies of Holy Scripture."}: “The conversion of our corrupt will is nothing else than a resuscitation of it from spiritual death.” 

In an unscriptural sense the term has been employed by both synergists and Pietists to denote a state, or condition, in which the sinner is indeed _awakened_ to a sense of his guilt and to a desire for salvation through Christ, but is not yet converted because he has not yet decided to accept divine grace (_status medius_). However, according to Scripture all who are thus truly _awakened_ (vivified, resuscitated) are already converted, [Eph. 2, 5—8](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ephesians%202%3A5-8&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ—by grace you have been saved — and raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, so that in the coming ages he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God,"}. 

It is true, the term _awakened_ may be used correctly in the sense that a sinner has been alarmed by the Law, though not yet brought to faith in Christ through the Gospel.[^2] In that sense Felix, [Acts 24, 25](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/24-25.htm){:target="_blank" title="And as he reasoned about righteousness and self-control and the coming judgment, Felix was alarmed and said, 'Go away for the present. When I get an opportunity I will summon you."}, and the jailer at Philippi, [16, 30](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/16-30.htm){:target="_blank" title="Then he brought them out and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”"}, may be said to have been awakened.[^1] If used in this way, the “awakening” of the sinner belongs to the preparatory acts of conversion (_actus praeparatorii_), or to the assisting grace of God (_gratia assistens_), which reacts upon the sinner merely from without (_extrinsecus_), as our dogmaticians have said. 

The great mistake which the Pietists and synergists made was that they applied the term `awakened` to those who were not only terrified by the divine Law, but possessed already “the first beginnings of faith” (_prima initia fidei_), in other words, who were already converted. The `awakened`, they maintained, were neither converted nor unconverted. Such a synergistic middle state (_status medius_), however, Scripture does not acknowledge, as we have shown above. On the contrary, according to Scripture every penitent sinner who has the _prima initia fidei_ (_scintillula fidei_) is truly converted, as the _Formula of Concord_ rightly teaches [Thor. Decl., II, 14](https://boc.confident.faith/sd-ii-0014){:target="_blank" title="To all godly Christians who feel and experience in their hearts a small spark or longing for divine grace and eternal salvation this precious passage is very comforting; for they know that God has kindled in their hearts this beginning of true godliness, and that He will further strengthen and help them in their great weakness to persevere in true faith unto the end."}. 

## c. Illumination

c. _Illumination (illuminatio)._ This term designates the transfer of man from his natural state of spiritual darkness into a new state of spiritual light, [Eph. 5, 8](https://biblehub.com/crossref/ephesians/5-8.htm){:target="_blank" title="for at one time you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light"}. Illumination, in its strict sense, therefore is synonymous with conversion; for it consists essentially in the gracious act of God by which He “opens the eyes of the spiritually blind, turns them from darkness to light and from the power of Satan unto God that they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance ... by faith,” [Acts 26, 18](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/26-18.htm){:target="_blank" title="to open their eyes, so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me"}. Both illumination and conversion occur through faith in the Gospel of Christ; both have the same _terminus a quo_, namely, darkness, and the same _terminus ad quern_, namely, faith. This is proved by the word of Christ: “I am come a Light into the world that whosoever believeth on Me should not abide in darkness,” [John 12, 46](https://biblehub.com/crossref/john/12-46.htm){:target="_blank" title="I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness."}. Hence, as long as a person is an unbeliever, he is not enlightened, or illuminated. With respect to this point the Pietists were right in opposing their orthodox opponents, who ascribed even to unbelieving ministers a certain illumination, or rather an allumination (_alluminatio_); for illumination can be predicated only of true believers in Christ. 

## d. Vocation

d. _Vocation (vocatio)._ The term _vocation_ in Scripture sometimes denotes merely the proclamation of the Gospel, or the extending of the divine invitation of salvation to sinners. In this sense all men are called who hear or read the gracious message of the Gospel, Matt. [20, 16](https://biblehub.com/crossref/matthew/20-16.htm){:target="_blank" title="So the last will be first, and the first last."}; [22, 14](https://biblehub.com/crossref/matthew/22-14.htm){:target="_blank" title="For many are called, but few are chosen."}. However, in most passages of Scripture the word designates not merely the gracious offer of salvation through the Gospel, but the effectual calling of sinners to spiritual life, or their actual transfer from the kingdom of Satan to the kingdom of Christ. In this sense the term vocation is synonymous with conversion. The called (_κλητοῦ_) are the converted, that is to say, true believers, who by faith have appropriated unto themselves the gracious promises of the Gospel, [Rom. 1, 5. 6](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Romans%201%3A5-6&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="through whom we have received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name among all the nations, including you who are called to belong to Jesus Christ,"}; [8, 30](https://biblehub.com/crossref/romans/8-30.htm){:target="_blank" title="And those whom he predestined he also called, and those whom he called he also justified, and those whom he justified he also glorified."}; 1 Cor. [1, 2](https://biblehub.com/crossref/1_corinthians/1-2.htm){:target="_blank" title="To the church of God that is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints together with all those who in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and ours:"}[. 26](https://biblehub.com/crossref/1_corinthians/1-26.htm){:target="_blank" title="For consider your calling, brothers: not many of you were wise according to worldly standards, not many were powerful, not many were of noble birth."}; [2 Tim. 1, 9](https://biblehub.com/crossref/2_timothy/1-9.htm){:target="_blank" title="who saved us and called us to a holy calling, not because of our works but because of his own purpose and grace, which he gave us in Christ Jesus before the ages began,"}, etc. 

## e. Repentance

e. _Repentance (poenitentia)_.[^3] The term _repentance_ (_μετάνοια_) is used in both a narrower and a wider sense. The _Formula of Concord_ thus writes (Thor. [Decl., V, 7](https://boc.confident.faith/sd-v-0007){:target="_blank" title="Likewise the term repentance also is not employed in the Holy Scriptures in one and the same sense. For in some passages of Holy Scripture it is employed and taken for the entire conversion of man, as Luke 13:5: Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And in 15:7: Likewise joy shalt be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth."}[. 8](https://boc.confident.faith/sd-v-0008){:target="_blank" title="But in this passage, Mark 1:15, as also elsewhere, where repentance and faith in Christ, Acts 20:21, or repentance and remission of sins, Luke 24:46-47, are mentioned as distinct, to repent means nothing else than truly to acknowledge sins, to be heartily sorry for them, and to desist from them."}): “The term repentance is not employed in the Holy Scriptures in one and the same sense. For in some passages of Holy Scripture it is employed and taken for the entire conversion of man, as [Luke 13, 5](https://biblehub.com/crossref/luke/13-5.htm){:target="_blank" title="No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish."}; [15, 7](https://biblehub.com/crossref/luke/15-7.htm){:target="_blank" title="Just so, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance."}. But in this passage, [Mark 1, 15](https://biblehub.com/crossref/mark/1-15.htm){:target="_blank" title="and saying, 'The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel."}, as also elsewhere, where repentance and faith in Christ, [Acts 20, 21](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/20-21.htm){:target="_blank" title="testifying both to Jews and to Greeks of repentance toward God and of faith in our Lord Jesus Christ."}, or repentance and remission of sins, [Luke 24, 46. 47](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Luke%2024%3A46-47&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title=" and said to them, “Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer and on the third day rise from the dead, and that repentance for the forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem."}, are mentioned as distinct, to repent means nothing else than truly to acknowledge sins, to be heartily sorry for them, and to desist from them” (i. e., from outward motives of fear and punishment; cp. Judas). 

Thus the term denotes: `a)` contrition, or the knowledge of sin wrought by the Law (_terrores conscientiae_); this is the meaning of the word in all those passages in which repentance is distinguished from remission of sins, [Luke 24, 47](https://biblehub.com/crossref/luke/24-47.htm){:target="_blank" title="and that repentance for the forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem."}; `b)` contrition and faith, or the entire conversion of man, [Luke 13, 5](https://biblehub.com/crossref/luke/13-5.htm){:target="_blank" title="No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish."}. In the latter sense the term _repentance_ is a synonym of conversion. 

Baier writes of this distinction (III, 310) : “Although repentance is sometimes used in a stricter sense for that part of conversion which is called contrition, yet often it is employed for the entire conversion.” So also the _Augsburg Confession_ describes repentance when it says [Art. XII](https://boc.confident.faith/ac-xii-0003){:target="_blank" title="2-6"}: “Repentance properly consists of these two parts: One is contrition, that is, terrors smiting the conscience through the knowledge of sin; the other is faith, which is born of the Gospel, or of absolution, and believes that for Christ’s sake sins are forgiven, comforts the conscience, and delivers it from terrors.” 

The [_Augsburg Confession_](https://boc.confident.faith/ac-xii-0006){:target="_blank" title="the conscience, and delivers it from terrors. Then good works are bound to follow, which are the fruits of repentance."} rightly adds that the good works which are bound to follow repentance are the fruits of repentance. _Deinde sequi debent bona opera, quae sunt fructus poenitentiae._ 

This important truth must be held against the error of the Romanists, who maintain that repentance consists of contrition, confession, and satisfaction (_contritio cordis, confessio oris, satisfactio operis_). The papistic error, according to which human satisfaction for all transgressions constitutes the essential part of repentance, is a total denial of the Scriptural doctrine of repentance, [Mark 1, 15](https://biblehub.com/crossref/mark/1-15.htm){:target="_blank" title="and saying, “The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel."}, since it bases forgiveness of sins upon the good works of the penitent sinner. According to papistic teaching not only the _confessio oris and the satisfactio operis_, but also the _contritio cordis_ must be regarded as a meritorious act of the sinner. Hence repentance, in the Roman Catholic sense of the term, is altogether a work of man. 

This fact explains why Luther so vehemently inveighed against the papistic conception of repentance, insisting, on the basis of Scripture, that repentance indeed always produces good works, but is never the foundation upon which the forgiveness of sins rests. Cp. the _Apology_, [Art. XII (V), 16 ff](https://boc.confident.faith/ap-xiia-0016){:target="_blank" title="16-20"}.:

> “For the following dogmas are clearly false and foreign not only to Holy Scripture, but also to the Church Fathers:  
`1.` that from the divine covenant we merit grace by good works wrought without grace;  
`2.` that by attrition we merit grace;  
`3.` that for the blotting out of sin the mere detestation of the crime is sufficient;  
`4.` that on account of contrition, and not by faith in Christ, we obtain remission of sins,” etc. 

The Romanistic conception of contrition, with its emphasis on the good works of the penitent, renders impossible not only true faith in Christ, or trust in His merits, but also true contrition (_contritio passiva_), or the _terrores conscientiae_, which God works in man through the Law. As long as a sinner “repents” in the sense of Roman Catholic work-righteousness, it is impossible for him to believe in Christ and to be saved, [Gal. 5, 4](https://biblehub.com/crossref/galatians/5-4.htm){:target="_blank" title="You are severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the law; you have fallen away from grace."}. 

[^1]: Read also [Acts 2, 37](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/2-37.htm){:target="_blank" title="Now when they heard this they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, 'Brothers, what shall we do"} and [Acts 22, 10](){:target="_blank" title="And I said, ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ And the Lord said to me, ‘Rise, and go into Damascus, and there you will be told all that is appointed for you to do.’"}. 
Luther explains the conversion of St. Paul [Acts 22, 1-22](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Acts%209%3A1-22&version=ESV){:target="_blank" title="Who are you, Lord?” And he said, 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. But rise and enter the city, and you will be told what you are to do."} both in the 
[Church Postil](https://archive.org/details/st-l-12-en-us/page/n585/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 1145-1163"} and in the _House Postil_ 
([part 1 ](https://archive.org/details/st-l-13a-en-us/page/n559/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 1091-1101"} 
[and 2](https://archive.org/details/st-l-13b-en-us/page/n659/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 2647-2655"}). 
_Luther says in part 1_; 
"Paul has had enough of this warning and soon surrenders, speaking with trembling and fear: 
**Lord, what do you want me to do?** 
(15) From whence came the trembling and fearing, it must not be asked; for he should have despaired and died of sorrow, if the Lord Christ had not comforted him and lifted him up; for the Lord said unto him: 
**Get up and go to the city, and they will tell you what to do.** ... 
Paul himself, who hears the bodily voice and word of the Lord Christ and is to become the highest preacher, must go into the city and hear Ananiam. There, saith Christ, go; I will not make any special thing for him, nor teach and baptize him further in the field; but direct him to Anania into the city, where is his word and baptism. And Paul gladly follows, though he does not yet know where he is to go or who is to tell him. 
(18) Then our Lord God sends Ananiam, as history reports, who preaches to him, baptizes him and lays his hands on him. That alfo Paul comes to the knowledge of Christ and the Word through Ananiam. He must receive his light from the same little sulfur wood, which was not a finger against Paul and not a candle against the sun. (19) This is to be noted especially here in this history, that one should learn to hold the preaching ministry in high esteem. For here it is written loud and clear that Paul, the great doctor, through the The little doctor, Ananiam, comes to his senses, and as soon as he appears, he becomes another man, ..." 
([House Postil, part1](https://archive.org/details/st-l-13a-en-us/page/n563/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 1097-1099"}). 
_Luther says in part 2_; 
"(15) When Paul hears this, he has had enough and speaks with trembling and fear: This is the way to teach a Moses. This man, who is called Jesus of Nazareth, can to say to one with earnestness that he feels. Paul would have had to despair and die if Christ had not lifted him up and comforted him. For he spoke to him: Get up and go to the city; there they will tell you what to do. 
(16) Although he speaks to Paul from heaven, he does not want to abolish the preaching ministry, nor does he want to do anything special for anyone." 
([House Postil, part 2](https://archive.org/details/st-l-13b-en-us/page/n663/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 2653-2654"})

[^2]: Luther teach us about this when St. Paul "was to be converted, [Acts 9, 4](https://biblehub.com/crossref/acts/9-4.htm){:target="_blank" title="And falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?"} ... 9, 4, where Christ Himself preaches repentance to him from heaven"; (Section 51)
"(54) Therefore, if your conscience is troubled by the sermon of repentance, whether by word of mouth or otherwise in your heart, you must know that you should also hear and grasp the other part that Christ commanded you to say: Although you deserve eternal wrath and are guilty of hellish fire, yet God, out of causeless goodness and mercy, will not let you be stuck in your condemnation nor perish, but will forgive your sin, so that His wrath and your condemnation may be taken away from you." 
[Church Postil On Easter Tuesday.](https://archive.org/details/st-l-11-en-us/page/n395/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 714 and 716"}

[^3]: See notes 1 and 2 above on what Luther says about _repentance_.