---
title: 9. TRANSITIVE AND INTRANSITIVE CONVERSION.
description: Conversio Transitive; Conversio Intransitive.
---

On the basis of Holy Scripture our dogmaticians speak of transitive and intransitive conversion (conversio transitiva; conversio intransitiva) . In other words, God is said to convert man, and again, man is said to convert himself (Jer. 31, 18, 



CONVERSION, OR THE BESTOWAL OF FAITH. 853 

Acts 3,19, fxezavorjoaTE; Jer. 24, 7, *3E*’). Between the two, however, there is no real distinction (realis distinctio), since man converts himself only when God converts him. Both expressions therefore describe one and the same act, of which God alone is the efficient Cause. The expressions must therefore not be understood in the synergistic sense as though God began while man himself accomplished or completed conversion. While the expression “intransitive conversion” (“Man converts himself”) is Scriptural, it must not be forgotten that in conversion God “worketh in man both to will and to do,” Phil. 2,13. 

Baier^ remark on the point is truly Scriptural. He writes: “The word conversion is taken in a double sense in the Scriptures, inasmuch as at one time God is said to convert man and at another that man is said to convert himself, although as to the thing itself (quoad rem) the action is one and the same (una et eadem)" That God alone works conversion is abundantly proved in Scripture, Jer. 31,18; John 6, 44; Eph. 1,19; etc. These passages do not allow even a modified form of synergism (Man’s conversion depends on his necessary condition of passiveness and submissiveness toward the Gospel call; cp. Latermann, Dieckhoff, etc.). 
