---
title: 9. WHO MAY BE ADMITTED TO THE LORD'S SUPPER.
description: Finis cui Coen.ae Sacrae.
---

Christian ministers are only "stewards," not lords, of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4, 1. For this reason they must administer the means of grace (the Gospel and the Sacraments) just as Christ has instituted them, 1 Cor. 4, 2; Matt. 28, 20. Ministers or congregations departing from Christ's institution in administering the Holy Supper reject His authority, oppose His will, misuse the precious Sacrament, and therefore "come together unto condemnation," 1 Cor. 11, 29-34. - Concerning the right administration of the Lord's Supper Holy Scripture teaches the following truths: -

a. Not open, but close communion must be practised by the Christian Church, since it is God's will that only believers should approach the Lord's Table, 1 Cor. 11, 26-28. While the Gospel should be preached to believers and unbelievers alike, Matt. 16, 15. 16, the Lord's Supper is designed only for the regenerate, as Christ's words of institution and the normative practise of the holy apostles prove, 1 Cor. 10, 16; 11, 26-34.

Luther writes on this point [St. L., XI, 615](https://archive.org/details/st-l-09-deep-l-en/page/n321/mode/2up){:target="_blank"} : "So Christ has done; the preaching [of the Gospel] He permitted to go to every one in a heap, as afterwards also the apostles did, so that all heard it, whether they were believers or unbelievers. . . . So alsowe must do. But we should not cast the Sacrament among the people in a heap. If I preach the Gospel, I do not know whom it strikes; but here I must be sure that it has struck him who goes to the Sacrament. So I must not be in doubt, but know assuredly that he to whom I give the Sacrament has comprehended the Gospel and rightly believes."

The doctrine of close communion must be maintained not only against Reformed sects, but also against Lutheran errorists. (Cp. _Geschichte der Luth. Kirche_, by A. L. Graebner, sub _Abendmahl; Lehre und Wehre_, 1888, pp. 257 ff. 302 ff.)

b. Of Christians only those may be admitted to the Lord's Table -
1. Who are already baptized;
2. Who are able to examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11, 28. This excludes children, unconscious persons, patients in a coma, and all persons who are not _compos mentis_ (insanity);
3. Who believe that in Holy Communion they receive Christ's body and blood in, with, and under the bread and wine for the gracious remission of their sins, Matt. 26, 26-28. This excludes all Reformed, rationalists, etc., who deny the real presence, as well as all papists (Romanizing Lutherans), who teach that the Sacrament works _ex opere operato_ and so deny that faith is the medium _ληπτικόν_ of the proffered forgiveness of sins;
4. Who may do so without giving offense to others, 2 Cor. 6, 3; Matt. 18, 7. This excludes all those 1) who live in gross sins, 1 Cor. 5, 11 ; 2) who refuse to forgive and be reconciled, Matt. 18, 15-17. 35; 5, 23. 24; and 3) who are guilty of unionism or syncretism, Rom. 16, 17; 2 John 10. 11. The Sacrament must be withheld from all who are connected with erring churches and unchristian or antichristian cults, Eph. 4, 1-6; 5, 7-11; 2 Cor. 6, 14-18.

Since lodgery is a pagan cult, based upon work-righteousness, and as such denies the very purpose of Holy Communion, namely, the imparting of the forgiveness of sins through faith in Christ _(sola fide)_, it is self-evident that lodge-fellowship is inconsistent with the true profession of the Christian faith. Lodge members should therefore be excluded from Holy Communion a) because, as members of antichristian cults, they deny the specific teachings of the Christian religion (the Holy Trinity, the deity of Christ, His vicarious atonement, salvation by grace, etc.) and b) because they give offense to confessing Christians by going to the Lord's Supper while holding membership in antichristian societies, Matt. 10, 32-39.

Because the Holy Supper may be received to judgment (1 Cor. 11, 29: "(!κρίμα), the Christian minister must not only urge all communicants diligently to examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11, 28, but also aid them in their self-examination. To this end he should retain both the confessional service and the Lutheran custom of "announcing for Communion" (_Beichtanmeldung_), which gives him an opportunity to deal individually with those who desire to attend the Lord's Table.

However, while the pastor should not admit to Holy Communion any unworthy guest, he must take care not to restrain from it any who are entitled to it. In general, it may be said that all baptized Christians who heartily repent of their sins, truly believe in Jesus Christ, regard the ordinance of Holy Communion as Christ instituted it, are open to Christian instruction on every point of doctrine and life, are able to examine themselves, lead a Christian life, and purpose to amend their lives by the aid of the Holy Spirit should be admitted to the Lord's Table.

Since the sacramental worthiness consists essentially in true faith, which this Sacrament strengthens and increases, also the weak in faith should be admitted to it, Matt. 11, 28; John 6, 37; in fact, these should be urged to come to the Lord's Table.

In all cases where the pastor, who is responsible for the conscientious administration of his office not only to his congregation, but also to God, 1 Cor. 4, 1. 2, would become a partaker of another man's sin, 1 Tim. 5, 22, if he accepts him as a guest at the Lord's Table, he is in duty bound to suspend a church-member from Holy Communion (cp. the case where a person refuses to be reconciled to his brother, Matt. 5, 23-25; 18, 28 ff.; Luke 17, 3).

Suspension from Holy Communion is not equivalent to the ban, or the official excommunication of the sinner by the congregation, 1 Cor. 5, 13, but the pastor's solemn declaration that the member in question for the time being cannot receive Holy Communion as a worthy guest. The suspended member may of course appeal from the pastor's judgment to that of the congregation, but in case the congregation wrongly decides against his correct decision, the Christian minister should allow himself to be expelled from office rather than lift the suspension which he has imposed in accordance with God's Word.

While the confession (either public or private) is not divinely instituted, it should be retained, especially on account of the absolution pronounced in it. (Cp. Luther, St. L., [X, 1655](https://archive.org/details/st-l-10-deep-l-en/page/n949/mode/2up){:target="_blank"}; [XI, 585-590](https://archive.org/details/st-l-11-en-us/page/n331/mode/2up){:target="_blank"}.) All other questions pertaining to this subject belong to the domain of Pastoral Theology.