---
title: 4. WHY SAVING FAITH JUSTIFIES.
description: 
---

`Saving faith is never without good works`, [Gal. 5, 6](){:target="_blank" title=""}. Indeed, it is itself a most excellent virtue, by which God is supremely glorified as the Lord of love, who because of His grace in Christ Jesus receives and absolves penitent sinners, [Rev. 14, 7](){:target="_blank" title=""}. But though faith is itself a most precious work[^1] and the unfailing source of constant good works, it does not save as a good work or as the source of good works, but solely as the means (_medium ληπτικόν_), by which the believer apprehends the grace of God and the merits of Christ which are offered to him in the Gospel. Again, **although faith is an act of both the intellect and the will of man**, — for not the Holy Ghost, but the believer himself trusts in the mercy of God, — `yet it does not justify inasmuch as it is an act or work of man.` 

These two truths are of the greatest importance for the right understanding of the Christian doctrine of salvation by faith (_sola fide_). Our dogmaticians have embodied them in the statement: 

> “Faith does not justify in itself[^2], that is, as an act or habit of believing, nor through the works which it produces, but in view of its object, namely, because it apprehends the grace secured by Christ and offered in the Gospel.” 

Hollaz writes: 

> “Justifying faith is the receptive organ and, as it were, the hand of the poor sinner by which he applies and takes to himself, lays hold of, and possesses, those things which are proffered in the free promise of the Gospel. God, the supreme Monarch, extends from heaven the hand of grace, the grace obtained by the merit of Christ, and in it offers salvation. The sinner, in the abyss of misery, receives as a beggar in his hand of faith what is thus offered to him. The offer and the reception are correlatives. Therefore the hand of faith, which seizes and appropriates the offered treasure, corresponds to the hand of grace which offers the treasure of righteousness and salvation.” [_Doctr . Theol_., p. 420](){:target="_blank" title=""}.

So also the _Formula of Concord_ [Thor. Decl., III, 11](){:target="_blank" title=""}[. 38](){:target="_blank" title=""} says: 

> “Faith is the gift of God by which we apprehend aright Christ, our Redeemer, in the Gospel.” 

> “It is faith alone, and nothing else whatever, which is the means and instrument by which the grace of God and the merit of Christ in the promise of the Gospel are embraced, received, and applied to us.” 

- This important truth is taught in all passages of Scripture in which saving faith is placed in opposition to human works, [Rom. 3, 28](){:target="_blank" title=""}; [4, 5](){:target="_blank" title=""}; [Eph. 2, 8. 9](){:target="_blank" title=""}. 

All who teach and believe that saving faith justifies inasmuch as it is a good work itself or the source of good works (papists, Arminians, rationalists, Modernists) have fallen from grace and renounced the Christian faith. Luther: 

> “Christ alone justifies me over against my evil works and without my good works. If I regard Christ in this way, then I apprehend the right Christ.” [St. L., IX, 619](){:target="_blank" title=""}.

[^1]: Luther and the old theologians called "faith" a "work" or "doing". See note 1 in subchapter 5 (_Justification on the basis of works_) in this chapter about "Justification by faith". [Pieper II, page 528](https://archive.org/details/pieper-cdk-2-001-672-deep-l-en/page/527/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Page 528-529"}.

[^2]: In the english translation of [Pieper II, page 527](https://archive.org/details/pieper-cdk-2-001-672-deep-l-en/page/527/mode/2up){:target="_blank" title="Luther says: 'Even in this respect faith does not justify in so far as it is a gift of the Holy Spirit (donum Spiritus Sancti)...(quatenus habet se correlative ad Christum)"} we can read a claim that Luther says something similar: 
_"Even in this respect faith does not justify in so far as it is a gift of the Holy Spirit (donum Spiritus Sancti) ..."_ 
In the original German language Pieper writes: 
_"Auch nicht einmal in dieser Hinsicht rechtfertigt der Glaube, insofern er eine Gabe des Heiligen Geistes (donum Spiritus Sancti) ..."_ 
[Google Translate (Ger-Eng)](https://translate.google.com.ph/?sl=de&tl=en&text=Auch%20nicht%20einmal%20in%20dieser%20Hinsicht%20rechtfertigt%20der%20Glaube%2C%20insofern%20er%20eine%20Gabe%20des%20Heiligen%20Geistes&op=translate){:target="_blank" title="Click to check the translation by yourself"}: _"Not even in this respect does faith, insofar as it is a gift of the Holy Spirit, justify ..."_
